RFC(storybook): conventions for story organization, naming and design (#19206)
microsoft/fluentui: rfcs/convergence/authoring-stories.md

TBA

### 7. dissecting big story files into smaller ones

Components with complex API require many long stories, both for documentation and for e2e testing. This creates long files with hundres of lines, which are hard to maintain. How can these files be dissected into smaller ones?

**Proposal:**

> 1. Every component can have at most one `.stories.tsx` file. This file has a default export with Storybook configuration for the docs page.

Reviewer: Do you have any vision to enforcing this requirement ? It should be quite simply to use multiple `stories.tsx` files and still not change the storybook structurally at all

Reviewer: it's why I kinda liked the `stories/` folder option I originally proposed, since we can force storybook to load folders from a specific folder instead of all wildcard blobs

Author: 🤔 We could contact storybook maintainers and see if they’d be open to a PR which would enforce unique `title`s throughout `.stories.tsx` files, in an opt-in mode. I believe they could be open to it as they state in their [documentation](https://storybook.js.org/docs/react/api/csf) that titles should be unique. If titles are unique, duplicate `.stories.tsx` would be always shown as different pages on the doc site, so this would be easier to keep in check.

That’d be the vision. I am not sure if it’ll actually get done :/.

> it's why I kinda liked the stories/ folder option I originally proposed, since we can force storybook to load folders from a specific folder instead of all wildcard blobs

Putting all stories into one folder doesn’t solve the issue though, right? In one folder, you could still have multiple `.stories.tsx` files for one component.

Reviewer 2: > Do you have any vision to enforcing this requirement ?

we can/want enforce guides via generators + lint/additional checks will need to be implemented manually...

but generators is primary point of HOW TO, as it if we decide to change things in future, based on that generator we can prepare migration generators and automate stuff

> 2. If putting all stories into one file would make it too long, individual stories might be put into `.story.tsx` files as a named export, and then re-exported from `.stories.tsx` file like this: `export * from ‘./IndividualStoryFile.story’;`

Reviewer: Again, how can we make sure people use the `story.tsx` convention ? what stops me from using a `.tsx` file ... which would be terrible and quite confusing

Author: Unfortunately, I don’t see a way enforce this. I still think it’s good to have documented what’s the right way of dealing with large files, so we could spread the knowledge and refer to it during PR review.

Reviewer 2: also note that only trigger point that tells storybook to render anything is the presence if `CSF` default export - which makes need of 2 different suffixes not relevant

Author: > I'd suggest to stay away from having 2 file name suffixes for storybook runtime code (.stories.* and *.story) -> *.stories.* should be sufficient

:white_check_mark: done

3. If individual story files are employed, `.stories.tsx` file must not contain any stories.

### 8. location and naming convention

> 1. Story files should be in the same folder as the component which they are targeting.

Reviewer: Let's go into detail about `the component which they are targeting`

i.e. if I wanted to show off `MenuItemCheckbox` which can't function without `Menu`, should that go in the `Menu` folder or the `MenuItemCheckbox` folder ?

Author: You want to show off `MenuItemCheckbox`, so it should go into `MenuItemCheckbox` folder. 

Is this better?

```suggestion
1. Story files should be in the same folder as the component which they are meant to show off. This will usually be the component which is the most unique to the story.
```

Reviewer 2: maybe it would make sense to set following rule - only package public API  should have 1:1 stories that are rendered in SB tree view, WDYT ?

Author: To clarify - are you suggesting that every publicly available component must have _exactly one_ .stories.tsx file? I think _at most one_ is a better rule, as for some subcomponents, separate page is not necessary. Examples would be `AccordionItem`, `MenuGroup`, ...

Reviewer 2: yeah what you said. there is another rabbit hole though :D , when you mentioned subcomponents - we probably should use generated `controls` for those as well, which will complicate things a lot ... but we can address that in another PR

2. Name of every .stories.tsx / .story.tsx file should start with name of a component which it is targeting, to improve colocation in alphabetical file ordering. If appropriate, story name should be adjusted via configuration to a well readable name, suitable for documentation, like this:

```tsx
export const ButtonPrimary = (props: ButtonProps) => <Button {...props}>Text</Button>;

> ButtonPrimary.args = {

Author: I think you meant `argTypes` instead of `args`, right?

> ButtonPrimary.args = {

Reviewer 2: nope I meant `args`, args is imperative way how to set component prop values

  primary: true,
};
ButtonPrimary.storyName = 'Better story name';
```

### 9. default story

> Every documented component must have a story called `Default`. This story must support manipulation with [Controls](https://storybook.js.org/docs/react/essentials/controls). Ordering of stories will be set up, so this would be the first story in Storybook nav tree.

Author: done

> Every documented component must have a story called `Default`. This story must support manipulation with [Controls](https://storybook.js.org/docs/react/essentials/controls). Ordering of stories will be set up, so this would be the first story in Storybook nav tree.

Author: Actually, we don’t need to configure ordering at all. Stories are ordered as in the order of their definitions. I’ve added a rule that default story must be defined first. Are you okay with this?

> ### 10. design of stories

Author: done - changed to appearance of stories

> Public stories should follow Fluent Design Language to give developers better feel for patterns they should utilise. For example, when a button is necessary do demonstrate usage of a component, Fluent UI Button should be used instead of a pure HTML button.

Reviewer: Can you check if eslint will scream if you import `react-button` inside a file in `react-accordion` ?

If it's the case, we should explicitly state that having external dependencies in stories aren't in package.json should be allwoed

Author: Checked, it doesn’t scream :)

> Public stories should follow Fluent Design Language to give developers better feel for patterns they should utilise. For example, when a button is necessary do demonstrate usage of a component, Fluent UI Button should be used instead of a pure HTML button.

Author: done

> ### 11. story code must be useful

Author: done

> Public stories should contain only code, which is useful for users to see after clicking on “Show code” in documentation. Extra markup (e.g., container with CSS styles) can be added via [Decorators](https://storybook.js.org/docs/react/writing-stories/decorators).

Reviewer: Should we explicitly duplicate code to fulfil this requirement ? otherwise users would see `XYZHelper` in a bunch of stories that wouldn't mean anything

Author: I am not sure if I understand your concern well. You shouldn’t duplicate code.

If the decorator is useful for all stories on the documentation page, you should specify it in the default export:
```jsx
export default {
  title: 'Button',
  component: Button,
  decorators: [
    (Story) => (
      <div style={{ margin: '3em' }}>
        <Story />
      </div>
    ),
  ],
};
```

If the decorator is useful for multiple stories which differ only in props, you should use `.bind()`:
```jsx
export const ButtonStory = …
ButtonStory.decorators = [(Story) => <div style={{ margin: '3em' }}><Story/></div>];

const Primary = ButtonStory.bind({});
Primary.args = {
  primary: true,
  label: 'Button',
}

const Secondary = ButtonStory.bind({});
Secondary.args = {
  ...Primary.args,
  primary: false,
}
```

If you can’t use `bind()` you should create a function which would be used in both stories. The documentation users will not see the usage of the function.

Do you see any issue with this?

Author: I can’t think of any useful guidance for that scenario. It’s at the discretion of the developer to consider trade offs between readability of code, appealing appearance and proper interactivity of the story.

If you were thinking of configuring the code manually with `Story.parameters.docs.source.code`, I don’t think it’s a good idea because it would break live code editing.

Can you think of any guidance that would be useful?

Reviewer 2: > If you were thinking of configuring the code manually w
nope that's not what I thought 

following code
```
function doFoo(){...}
function doBar(){...}

export const MyStory = (args) => {
   return <div>
      <Button>click</Button>
      doFoo().map(render....)
     {dooBar() ? 'hello' : <div>nope</div> }
  </div>
}
```

will show something like this in that `Show code` panel

```
<div>
      <Button>click</Button>
      doFoo().map(render....)
     {dooBar() ? 'hello' : <div>nope</div> }
  </div>
```

which will confuse the user as he has no idea what those functions do

Author: After discussion with @Hotell, we agreed that it’s better not to use `.bind()`, as it creates unnecessary cognitive overload. Exporting decorator to a function is easier to read, so this is the preferred approach.

```jsx
const buttonDecorator = (Story) => <div style={{ margin: '3em' }}><Story/></div>;

const Primary = <Button primary="true">Primary</Button>
Primary.decorators = [buttonDecorator];

const Secondary = <Button>Secondary</Button>
Secondary.decorators = [buttonDecorator];

TBA

### 7. dissecting big story files into smaller ones

Components with complex API require many long stories, both for documentation and for e2e testing. This creates big story files, which are hard to maintain. How can these files be dissected into smaller ones?

#### Proposal

1. Every component can have at most one `.stories.tsx` file with default export which configures metadata about the component. This file must be called `Component.stories.tsx`, for example `Button.stories.tsx`.
2. If putting all stories into one file would make it too long, individual stories might be put into additional `.stories.tsx` files as a named export, and then re-exported from `Component.stories.tsx` file like this: `export * from ‘./IndividualStoryFile.stories’;`
3. If individual story files are employed, `Component.stories.tsx` file must not contain any stories besides the default export.

> ##### Good Example 1 - single file

Reviewer 2: **suggestion:**  no need to use headings for everything - think about it in a way what chapter needs to be present in an outline ( from my experience having there N `Examples` creates unnecessary churn

Author: done

> Button.stories.tsx:

Reviewer 2: **suggestion:** consider using `@filename` pragma within code block -> used in TS examples/playground

```
\```tsx
@filename  Button.stories.tsx

.... your code
\```
```

```tsx

> import { Meta } from '@storybook/react';

Reviewer 2: **suggestion** no need to add those as we need to properly document in another RFC way how we wanna type stories

Author: How about we keep it for now and remove it in the PR that’ll propose typing of stories? Just a safer way in my opinion, cause plans don’t always get done :laughing:

This is just proper usage of Storybook with Typescript according to [their docs](https://storybook.js.org/docs/react/writing-stories/introduction), so no new best practice/convention is being proposed here - it’s just a reminder.

Reviewer 2: > How about we keep it for now and remove it in the PR that’ll propose typing of stories?

thats definitely works. please not that this comment type was a `suggestion` -> pls refer to following standard to understand type of comments in the future https://conventionalcomments.org/

export const Default = (props: ButtonProps) => <Button {...props}>Button</Button>;
export const ButtonWithIcon = () => <Button icon={<CalendarIcon />}>Text</Button>;

export default {
  title: 'Components/Button',

>   component: Button

Reviewer 2: where is `Button` coming from ? Is that another story? -> we should add that to these examples as well so its obvious for readers

} as Meta;
```

##### Good Example 2 - multiple files

Button.stories.tsx:
```tsx
import { Meta } from '@storybook/react';

> export * from "ButtonDefault.stories"

Reviewer 2: **question:** do you have enabled autoformatting in your editor ? this should have been reformated to use single quotes 👀

Author: fixed

> export * from "ButtonDefault.stories"

Reviewer 2: **chore:** Can we make this more explicit ?

Something like 

```ts
// 💡 `Default` re-export needs to be always first !
export * from "ButtonDefault.stories"
```

export * from "ButtonWithIcon.stories"

export default {
  title: 'Components/Button',
  component: Button
} as Meta;
```

ButtonDefault.stories.tsx:
```tsx
export const ButtonDefault = (props: ButtonProps) => <Button {...props}>Button</Button>;
ButtonDefault.storyName = "Default"
```

ButtonWithIcon.stories.tsx:
```tsx
export const ButtonWithIcon = () => <Button icon={<CalendarIcon />}>Text</Button>;
```

##### Bad example - multiple files

> 

Reviewer 2: can we add 2 examples that cover all the donts?

- 1. dont define CFS within your stories if you are using "multiple files" pattern
- 2. dont mix  re-exports with inline definition within main story ( story that will be rendered in tree )

Author: The first point is already addressed by the first example, right? I’ve added a second example to address the second point :).

ButtonDefault.storyName = "Default"

// don’t do this
export default {
  title: 'Components/Button',
  component: Button
} as Meta;
```

ButtonWithIcon.stories.tsx:
```tsx
export const ButtonWithIcon = () => <Button icon={<CalendarIcon />}>Text</Button>;

// don’t do this
export default {
  title: 'Components/Button',
  component: Button
} as Meta;
```

### 8. location and naming convention

1. Story files should be in the same folder as the component which they are meant to show off. This will usually be the component which is the most unique to the story.
2. Name of every .stories.tsx file should start with name of a component which it is targeting, to improve colocation in alphabetical file ordering. If appropriate, story name should be adjusted via configuration to a well readable name, suitable for documentation, like this:

```tsx
export const ButtonPrimary = (props: ButtonProps) => <Button {...props}>Text</Button>;
ButtonPrimary.args = {
  primary: true,
};
ButtonPrimary.storyName = 'Better story name';
```

### 9. UX of stories

#### default story

Every component must have a story called `Default`, which:

> - must be the first story in the component - see [chapter 7](#7-dissecting-big-story-files-into-smaller-ones) for examples

Reviewer 2: **suggestion:** must be defined as first story inline or as first re-expored story when using multi-file pattern...

3. If individual story files are employed, `.stories.tsx` file must not contain any stories.

### 8. location and naming convention

1. Story files should be in the same folder as the component which they are meant to show off. This will usually be the component which is the most unique to the story.
2. Name of every .stories.tsx file should start with name of a component which it is targeting, to improve colocation in alphabetical file ordering. If appropriate, story name should be adjusted via configuration to a well readable name, suitable for documentation, like this:

```tsx
export const ButtonPrimary = (props: ButtonProps) => <Button {...props}>Text</Button>;
ButtonPrimary.args = {
  primary: true,
};
ButtonPrimary.storyName = 'Better story name';
```

### 9. UX of stories

#### first story is called default

The first story in every component must be called `Default`. This story must support manipulation with [Controls](https://storybook.js.org/docs/react/essentials/controls). More details in [chapter 3](#3-should-controls-work-for-all-stories-or-only-for-generaldefault-one).

#### appearence of stories

> Public stories should follow Fluent Design Language to give developers better feel for patterns they should utilise. For example, when a button is necessary to demonstrate usage of a component, Fluent UI Button should be used instead of a pure HTML button.

Author: Probably not, but I think this kind of circular dependencies are not an issue. These dependencies don’t need to be specified in package.json. The individual packages stay independent.

> Public stories should follow Fluent Design Language to give developers better feel for patterns they should utilise. For example, when a button is necessary to demonstrate usage of a component, Fluent UI Button should be used instead of a pure HTML button.

Reviewer 2: > Is this feasible without introducing circular dependencies?

there are no real circular dependencies -> that is solved with the new DX for vNext

**context/refresher:**

> more details https://github.com/microsoft/fluentui/blob/master/rfcs/build-system/01_convergence_devstack.md

- packages must specify `dependencies` only for packages that are being used for runtime code, not for stories code.

```
// @filename component.tsx
import {Button} from '@fui/button'

export const Component  = (props) => {  <div><Button>click</Button></div> };

---

// @filename component.stories.tsx
import {Button} from '@fui/button'
import {Menu} from '@fui/menu'

export const Example  = (args) => {  <Menu><Button>click</Button></Menu> };
```

```
// @filename package.json

{
  "name": "@fui/component",
  "dependencies": {
      "@fui/button": "9.0.0-alpha.123"
     // NO @fui/menu specified as that dependency is not being used in implementation code
   }
}
```

TBA

### 7. dissecting big story files into smaller ones

Components with complex API require many long stories, both for documentation and for e2e testing. This creates big story files, which are hard to maintain. How can these files be dissected into smaller ones?

**Proposal:**

1. Every component can have at most one `.stories.tsx` file with default export which configures metadata about the component. This file must be called `Component.stories.tsx`, for example `Button.stories.tsx`.
2. If putting all stories into one file would make it too long, individual stories might be put into additional `.stories.tsx` files as a named export, and then re-exported from `Component.stories.tsx` file like this: `export * from ‘./IndividualStoryFile.stories’;`

> 3. If individual story files are employed, `Component.stories.tsx` file must not contain any stories.

Reviewer 2: the file that will be rendered must contain a story - the default export` which is triggerpoint that it should be rendered in tree view. can we mention that here explicitly -> "besides having the default export ...."

- text is great but if we could provide examples it would be more easier to understand 🙏

### 8. location and naming convention

> 1. Story files should be in the same folder as the component which they are meant to show off. This will usually be the component which is the most unique to the story.

Reviewer 2: 👍

> 2. Name of every .stories.tsx file should start with name of a component which it is targeting, to improve colocation in alphabetical file ordering. If appropriate, story name should be adjusted via configuration to a well readable name, suitable for documentation, like this:

Reviewer 2: 👍

```tsx
export const ButtonPrimary = (props: ButtonProps) => <Button {...props}>Text</Button>;
ButtonPrimary.args = {
  primary: true,
};
ButtonPrimary.storyName = 'Better story name';
```

### 9. UX of stories

> #### first story is called default

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
#### main component story

- is named `Default` -> `export const Default = () => {...}`
```

Author: What do you think about "default story"? I think it’s better to keep naming consistent

Reviewer 2: TBH not sure :D , after our discussion yesterday it would make sense to name it `Playground` or `ApiPlayground`  which will express the intent in better way than `Default`

> The first story in every component must be called `Default`. This story must support manipulation with [Controls](https://storybook.js.org/docs/react/essentials/controls). More details in [chapter 3](#3-should-controls-work-for-all-stories-or-only-for-generaldefault-one).

Reviewer 2: `The first story in every component must be called `Default`.`

can we write the rules as bullet points ? 
- again it's easier to read.
- I'd reword the 1st sentence a bit

↓↓↓

```
The main story for every component must adhere to following rules
-  named as `Default`
-  will be rendered as 1st story in tree view
-  supports auto generated controls
- ...etc
````

#### appearance of stories

> Public stories should follow Fluent Design Language to give developers better feel for patterns they should utilize. For example, when a button is necessary to demonstrate usage of a component, Fluent UI Button should be used instead of a pure HTML button.

Reviewer 2: 👍

> ##### Do:

Reviewer 2: 🙌
